.. _release-v2.0.0:

**v2.0.0** — |MAJOR| Stable Release
=====================================

*Released: April 2026*

Upgrading from v1.0.0
---------------------

No user-facing API changes relative to v1.0.0.  The v2.0 line hardens the
internal test infrastructure, continuous-integration pipeline, and multi-backend
support.  All constructor signatures, parameter names, and return shapes are
identical to v1.0.0.

Bug Fixes
---------

- |Bugfix| Resolved ``TypeError: metaclass conflict`` that prevented importing
  the four Keras ``Loss`` sub-classes (``MeanSquaredErrorLoss``, ``QuantileLoss``,
  ``HuberLoss``, ``WeightedLoss``) when the ``NNLearner`` mixin was present in the
  inheritance chain.  Fixed by removing ``NNLearner`` from all four loss classes.

- |Bugfix| Resolved ``ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'torch'`` that caused
  pytest collection to abort on environments where PyTorch is not installed.  The
  bare ``import torch`` at module level in ``test_cov_implementations_gaps.py`` was
  replaced with ``pytest.importorskip("torch", ...)`` so the file is gracefully
  skipped.

- |Bugfix| Resolved ``TypeError: function() argument 'code' must be code, not str``
  during test collection on TensorFlow-only environments.  Root cause: the Keras-patch
  helper used ``lambda *a, **kw: None`` as the default fallback for unknown
  ``KERAS_DEPS`` attributes.  Fixed by introducing ``_KerasStub`` — a genuine Python
  class — as the default fallback, and explicitly mapping ``"Loss"``, ``"Layer"``,
  ``"Model"``, and ``"register_keras_serializable"`` in ``_FALLBACKS``.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``TypeError: can't convert mps:0 device type tensor to numpy``
  in ``CRPSLoss._crps_mixture_mc`` on Apple Silicon (MPS).  The mixture MC
  computation now moves inputs to CPU at entry when an MPS device is detected.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``ValueError: operands could not be broadcast together`` in
  ``CRPSLoss._crps_mixture_mc`` on Linux CI.  Weight normalisation now uses
  explicit ``expand_dims`` for non-torch backends.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``TypeError`` in ``SqueezeExcite1D.call`` and ``drop_path``
  from MPS vs CPU device mismatches; added ``.to(x.device)`` guards.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``np.asarray(mps_tensor)`` calls in test helpers; replaced with
  the ``_to_numpy`` helper (which calls ``.cpu()`` first on torch tensors).

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``_get_static_value`` in ``base_attentive/__init__.py``: added a
  ``result is not value`` guard so the function correctly returns ``None`` for
  non-tensor Python objects.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``_tf_build_positional_encoding`` to build the angle matrix
  entirely in NumPy, avoiding MPS in-place slice-assignment failures.

- |Bugfix| Fixed ``broadcast_like`` in ``layer_utils.py``: added a
  ``_scalar_to_int`` helper to move rep scalars to CPU before ``tf_tile``.

Infrastructure / CI
--------------------

- |Internal| Fixed PyPI publishing workflow — ``pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish``
  now uses API token authentication exclusively; removed ``id-token: write``
  permission that caused failed OIDC Trusted Publishing attempts, and added
  ``attestations: false`` to skip the OIDC code path entirely.

- |Internal| Fixed CI hang on Linux and macOS runners: added
  ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES: ''``, ``TF_CPP_MIN_LOG_LEVEL: '3'``, and
  ``TF_ENABLE_ONEDNN_OPTS: '0'``; set ``log_cli = false`` and
  ``log_file_level = WARNING`` in ``pytest.ini``; added ``pytest-timeout>=2.3.0``
  with ``--timeout=120`` and ``timeout-minutes: 30`` at the job level.

- |Internal| Fixed ``tomllib`` import error in the publish workflow version-detection
  step — replaced with a ``re.search`` on raw ``pyproject.toml`` text (Python 3.10
  compatible).

- |Internal| Fixed secret name mismatch: workflow now references the correct
  ``TEST_PYPI_API_TOKENS`` secret name.

- |Internal| Test suite passes the full Linux × macOS × Windows CI matrix at
  94 % coverage across Python 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12.

Documentation
-------------

- |Internal| Split monolithic ``release_notes.rst`` into ``docs/release_notes/``
  directory; each version now has its own file.
- |Internal| Added PyPI version, Semantic Versioning, GitHub last commit, Open
  Issues, and PRs Welcome badges to ``docs/index.rst``.
- |Internal| README logo updated to raw GitHub URL so it renders on PyPI; Quick
  Start updated to v2 API.
- |Internal| Citation updated: year 2025 → 2026, title reflects multi-backend
  design; ``pyproject.toml`` classifier promoted to
  ``Development Status :: 5 - Production/Stable``.

Removed from Repository
------------------------

- |Internal| ``V2_BACKENDS_IMPLEMENTATION.md``, ``V2_IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md``,
  and ``.claude/`` directory removed from the remote; patterns added to
  ``.gitignore``.
