.. _release-v2.0.0rc1:

**v2.0.0rc1** — |MAJOR| Release Candidate 1
=============================================

*Released: April 2026*

Upgrading from v2.0.0rc0
-------------------------

No user-facing API changes.  This release candidate fixes the PyPI publishing
pipeline and CI infrastructure so that automated deployment is fully operational.

Bug Fixes
---------

- |Bugfix| Resolved ``TypeError: function() argument 'code' must be code, not str``
  during pytest collection on TensorFlow-only environments (backported from rc0
  work; both ``test_cov_components_pure.py`` and ``test_cov_components_keras.py``
  now use ``_KerasStub`` as the default fallback instead of a bare lambda).

Infrastructure / CI
--------------------

- |Internal| Fixed PyPI publishing workflow — ``pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish``
  now uses API token authentication exclusively:

  - Removed ``id-token: write`` permission (was causing the action to attempt
    OIDC Trusted Publishing, which requires a publisher to be pre-registered on
    PyPI; the attempt failed with ``invalid-publisher`` and the step never fell
    back to the API token).
  - Added ``attestations: false`` to both ``publish-testpypi`` and
    ``publish-pypi`` steps, which tells the action to skip the OIDC code path
    entirely.

- |Internal| Fixed CI hang on Linux and macOS runners:

  - Added ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES: ''`` — prevents TensorFlow from scanning for
    CUDA GPUs on CPU-only runners (was causing 20-40 min stalls on Linux).
  - Added ``TF_CPP_MIN_LOG_LEVEL: '3'`` — suppresses TF C++ logs that were
    flooding pytest log capture and causing apparent freezes.
  - Added ``TF_ENABLE_ONEDNN_OPTS: '0'`` — disables oneDNN JIT tuning latency.
  - Set ``log_cli = false`` and ``log_file_level = WARNING`` in ``pytest.ini``
    to stop debug-level TF messages from being written to ``tests.log``.
  - Added ``pytest-timeout>=2.3.0`` and ``--timeout=120`` (2 min per test).
  - Added ``timeout-minutes: 30`` at the CI job level.

- |Internal| Fixed ``tomllib`` import error in version-detection step of the
  publish workflow — ``tomllib`` is Python 3.11+ only; replaced with a
  ``re.search`` on the raw ``pyproject.toml`` text (compatible with Python 3.10).

- |Internal| Fixed secret name mismatch: workflow was referencing
  ``TEST_PYPI_API_TOKEN`` (singular) but the repository secret is named
  ``TEST_PYPI_API_TOKENS`` (plural).

Documentation
-------------

- |Internal| Split ``release_notes.rst`` into ``docs/release_notes/`` directory;
  each version now has its own file for cleaner navigation and Git history.
- |Internal| Added five new badges to ``docs/index.rst``: PyPI version,
  Semantic Versioning, GitHub last commit, Open Issues, PRs Welcome.
- |Internal| Improved platform badge contrast (``lightgrey`` → ``#4a5568``).
- |Internal| README logo now uses the raw GitHub URL so it renders on PyPI.
- |Internal| README Quick Start updated to v2 API (removed
  ``import tensorflow as tf``, updated parameter names, numpy inputs).
- |Internal| Citation updated: year 2025 → 2026, title updated to reflect
  multi-backend design.

Removed from Repository
-----------------------

- |Internal| ``V2_BACKENDS_IMPLEMENTATION.md``, ``V2_IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md``,
  and ``.claude/`` directory removed from the remote; patterns added to
  ``.gitignore``.
