.. _release-v2.0.1:

**v2.0.1** — |PATCH| Bug Fix Release
======================================

*Released: April 2026*

Upgrading from v2.0.0
----------------------

Drop-in replacement.  No API changes.  Only the MPS device-conflict bug
described below is addressed.

Bug Fixes
---------

- |Bugfix| **Definitive MPS fix for** ``CRPSLoss._crps_mixture_mc`` on
  Apple Silicon (Torch + MPS backend).

  Previous releases (including v2.0.0) attempted to work around
  ``keras.ops`` failing on MPS tensors by moving inputs to CPU at the
  start of the function.  This was not sufficient: ``keras.ops.*``
  calls such as ``cumsum``, ``sigmoid``, ``cast``, ``reshape``, and
  ``gather`` can silently re-dispatch CPU tensors back to the default
  Keras device (MPS on Apple Silicon), causing ``mu_s`` / ``sig_s`` to
  land on MPS while ``eps`` (explicitly moved to CPU) remained on CPU —
  producing::

      RuntimeError: Expected all tensors to be on the same device,
      but found at least two devices, mps:0 and cpu!

  The fix introduces a **pure native-PyTorch early-return path** for the
  MPS case.  When ``_on_mps`` is ``True``, the entire sampling / gather /
  CRPS computation runs with ``torch.cumsum``, ``torch.randn``,
  ``torch.gather``, etc. — bypassing all ``keras.ops`` entirely and
  keeping every tensor on CPU throughout.  The non-MPS path (TensorFlow,
  JAX, CPU-Torch) is unchanged.

Documentation
-------------

- |Internal| **Expanded Architecture Guide** (``docs/architecture_guide.rst``).
  The v2.0.0 Registry / Resolver / Assembly system is now documented in
  depth:

  - What changed from v1.0.0 and why
  - :ref:`Breaking changes <arch-breaking-changes>` with migration examples
  - ``ComponentRegistry`` and ``ModelRegistry`` — how to register and
    resolve custom components
  - ``BaseAttentiveSpec`` / ``BaseAttentiveComponentSpec`` field reference
  - End-to-end build-from-spec example
  - Updated data-flow diagram reflecting the v2 assembly pipeline

- |Internal| README badges synchronised with ``docs/index.rst``: added
  version, semver, Keras ≥ 3.0, backends, last-commit, open-issues,
  PRs-welcome, and platform badges.

Examples
--------

- |Feature| **Two new Jupyter notebooks** added to ``examples/`` and
  rendered as HTML pages within the documentation (see
  :ref:`examples-notebooks`):

  - ``06_crps_probabilistic_forecasting.ipynb`` — covers all three
    :class:`~base_attentive.components.losses.CRPSLoss` modes
    (``"quantile"``, ``"gaussian"``, ``"mixture"``), Monte Carlo
    sample-count guidance, output-shape interpretation per mode, and a
    sketch of a custom ``GradientTape``-style training loop.

  - ``07_v2_spec_registry.ipynb`` — end-to-end walkthrough of the v2
    declarative configuration system: ``BaseAttentiveSpec`` creation,
    JSON round-trip serialisation, ``BaseAttentiveComponentSpec``,
    registering a custom encoder via ``ComponentRegistry``,
    ``ModelRegistry``, and ``BaseAttentiveV2Assembly``.

- |Internal| **Notebook rendering via nbsphinx** integrated into the
  Sphinx build pipeline:

  - ``nbsphinx`` added to ``extensions`` in ``docs/conf.py`` with
    ``nbsphinx_execute = "never"`` so ReadTheDocs renders notebooks
    without requiring an ML runtime.
  - ``docs/conf.py`` auto-copies ``examples/*.ipynb`` →
    ``docs/notebooks/`` at build time, keeping ``examples/`` as the
    single source of truth.
  - New **Examples** section added to the documentation sidebar
    (``docs/notebooks/index.rst``) with a summary table of all seven
    notebooks and a Binder badge for interactive execution.
  - ``nbsphinx>=0.9.0`` and ``ipython>=8.0.0`` added to the
    ``[docs]`` optional dependency group in ``pyproject.toml``.
