.. _release-v2.1.0:

**v2.1.0** — |MINOR| Multi-Backend Stabilization and Compatibility Release
=============================================================================

*Released: April 2026*

Upgrading from v2.0.1
---------------------

This is a backward-compatible feature release focused on **Keras 3
multi-backend stabilization**, **runtime/import hardening**, and a new
**parameter-compatibility migration layer** for the evolving
``BaseAttentive`` API.

Most projects can upgrade directly from v2.0.1.  Existing code using the
older GeoPrior-v3 kernel-style parameter names remains supported through
explicit compatibility rules and deprecation warnings.

Highlights
----------

- |MINOR| **BaseAttentive is now stabilized as a Keras 3 multi-backend
  package** across TensorFlow, Torch, and JAX.

- |Feature| **New compatibility migration layer** under
  ``base_attentive.compat.versioning`` centralizes renamed parameters,
  deprecated aliases, precedence rules, and transitional warnings.

- |Internal| **Runtime bootstrap and imports are significantly lighter**.
  Import-time backend probing and eager TensorFlow/Keras loading were
  reduced so collection, documentation, and lightweight runtime paths are
  safer on mixed environments, especially Windows.

- |Feature| **Examples and documentation notebooks were refreshed** for the
  current v2 API and versioned as **v2.1.0**.

Compatibility and Migration
---------------------------

- |Feature| **Centralized parameter migration rules** added in
  ``base_attentive.compat.versioning``.

  The new compatibility layer provides:

  - declarative ``ParameterRule`` definitions,
  - dedicated warning classes,
  - ``resolve_deprecated_kwargs(...)`` and
    ``resolve_deprecated_config(...)`` helpers,
  - optional decorator-based application for constructors.

- |Deprecated| **Legacy GeoPrior-v3 kernel-style names remain accepted** and
  are transparently mapped to the newer public API with warnings.  The
  current rules include:

  - ``static_input_dim`` → ``static_dim``
  - ``dynamic_input_dim`` → ``dynamic_dim``
  - ``future_input_dim`` → ``future_dim``
  - ``max_window_size`` → ``lookback_window``
  - ``attention_levels`` → ``attention_stack``

- |Deprecated| **Quantile-count compatibility added**:
  ``n_quantiles`` is accepted and converted to evenly spaced quantiles.

- |Deprecated| **Transitional output-mode compatibility added**:
  ``output_mode="gaussian"`` and ``output_mode="mixture"`` are accepted in
  the compatibility layer, with explicit warnings when the requested
  behavior is not yet wired into the active path.

- |Deprecated| **Precedence rules are now explicit**.
  When both deprecated and canonical names are provided, the canonical
  parameter wins and the deprecated one is ignored with a warning.

Runtime and Backend Architecture
--------------------------------

- |Internal| **Backend foundation refactored around a cleaner Keras 3
  multi-backend runtime surface**.

  - Root package imports were lightened.
  - ``keras_runtime`` was made lazy.
  - backend initialization was deferred so ``import base_attentive`` no
    longer behaves like full runtime initialization.

- |Internal| **Collection-safe bootstrap improvements** reduce accidental
  TensorFlow/Keras imports during module import and test discovery.

- |Internal| **Explicit runtime imports** were adopted in core modules.
  Runtime symbols such as ``KERAS_DEPS`` now come from their defining
  runtime modules (for example ``_bootstrap.py``) instead of being pulled
  indirectly through package ``__init__``.

- |Feature| **Torch and JAX resolver coverage expanded** across the V2
  component surface, including projections, pooling, fusion, decoder-side
  blocks, and forecast heads.

- |Internal| **Resolver-built V2 components are more serialization-safe**.
  Generic resolver pieces that were previously plain callables are now
  tracked as serializable Keras layers where appropriate.

- |Internal| **Backend registration and registry aliasing were hardened**.
  Resolver registrations now better tolerate repeated setup and legacy key
  aliases such as ``head.quantile``.

Model Behavior and Output Contracts
-----------------------------------

- |Feature| **Forecast-output contract standardized**.

  - point forecasts follow ``BHO``
  - quantile forecasts follow ``BHQO``

  This aligns the quantile path with the conventional
  ``batch × horizon × quantile × output`` ordering.

- |Internal| **TensorFlow builder kwargs filtering** prevents resolver
  metadata (such as ``component_key``) from leaking into Keras layer
  constructors.

- |Bugfix| **TensorFlow registration idempotence improved** so repeated
  resolver setup no longer fails with duplicate component-registration
  errors.

- |Bugfix| **Torch/JAX runtime wrappers hardened** with improved builder
  shims, alias coverage, and backend-safe paths for the V2 stack.

Fallback, Validation, and Numeric Stability
-------------------------------------------

- |Bugfix| **Fallback numeric operations were hardened** for mixed runtime
  situations and Torch-backed tensors.

  This includes safer conversion paths for:

  - reductions,
  - concatenation,
  - ``reduce_logsumexp``,
  - validation helpers operating on BH/BH1/BHQO-style outputs.

- |Bugfix| **Temporal multiscale aggregation fallback paths** were corrected
  so sum-based aggregation works consistently in non-native fallback
  situations.

- |Bugfix| **Probabilistic head fallback paths** were improved so scalar NLL
  reductions no longer break when backend tensors flow through the safe
  NumPy fallback route.

Serialization and Configuration
-------------------------------

- |Internal| **V2 config round-trips were stabilized**.

  - nested spec serialization is normalized,
  - alias paths are cleaned during export,
  - ``from_config`` accepts the modern nested-spec form,
  - resolver-built assemblies survive JSON/config round-trips more
    reliably.

- |Feature| **V2 JSON/config workflows improved** with better support for
  normalized spec export and reconstruction.

Documentation and Examples
--------------------------

- |Feature| **Examples refreshed for the current API and v2.1.0 release**.

  Updated notebooks include:

  - ``01_quickstart.ipynb``
  - ``04_standalone_applications.ipynb``
  - ``05_kernel_robust_networks.ipynb``
  - ``06_crps_probabilistic_forecasting.ipynb``
  - ``07_v2_spec_registry.ipynb``

- |Internal| **Notebook content now reflects the post-v2.0.1 API**,
  including refreshed constructor arguments, updated registry/spec
  examples, and versioned install/display snippets for v2.1.0.

- |Internal| **Release-note structure expanded** to document the transition
  from the original TensorFlow/GeoPrior kernel usage toward the new,
  broader BaseAttentive compatibility and multi-backend design.
