.. _release-v2.2.0:

**v2.2.0** — |MAJOR| Keras 3 Multi-Backend Architecture
=========================================================

*Released: April 2026*

Upgrading from v2.1.0
-----------------------

This release is a major internal modernization of the v2 line.
It introduces the structured V2 specification system, a resolver/registry
architecture for backend-aware component assembly, lighter imports, and an
explicit backend-selection policy under Keras 3.

Projects upgrading from v2.1.0 should set ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND``
explicitly (see `Migration Notes`_ below).  The legacy ``BaseAttentive``
constructor remains supported through the compatibility layer.

Highlights
----------

- |MAJOR| **BaseAttentive v2.2.0 standardizes the v2 line around
  Keras 3 multi-backend use** with TensorFlow, Torch, and JAX treated as
  Keras 3 backends rather than framework targets.

- |Feature| **A structured specification system** was added under
  ``base_attentive.config`` to formalize model definition and separate
  legacy input adaptation from the new internal representation.

- |Feature| **A resolver and registry architecture** was introduced under
  ``base_attentive.registry`` and ``base_attentive.resolver`` for
  backend-aware component assembly.

- |Internal| **Top-level imports are significantly lighter**.  Backend
  detection, runtime bootstrap, and installation logic are deferred until
  the backend is actually needed.

- |Feature| **Explicit backend configuration and backend-specific install
  guidance** replace the previous silent TensorFlow fallback.

- |Feature| **End-to-end training-path tests** were added covering
  ``compile()``, ``fit()``, ``predict()``, save, reload, configuration
  round-trips, and legacy-to-spec adaptation.

Structured Configuration Layer
-------------------------------

- |Feature| **New** ``base_attentive.config`` **package** formalizes model
  definition with a set of focused modules:

  - ``schema.py`` — core spec dataclasses (``BaseAttentiveSpec``,
    ``BaseAttentiveComponentSpec``).
  - ``defaults.py`` — structured defaults for the spec.
  - ``normalize.py`` — spec normalization and serialization-safe export.
  - ``validate.py`` — strict spec validation.
  - ``legacy_adapter.py`` — adapts the legacy public constructor to the
    new spec system, including coarse parameter validation and legacy
    ``mode`` normalization.
  - ``architecture_helpers.py`` — pure architecture helpers relocated out
    of runtime component modules.

- |Feature| **Legacy** ``BaseAttentive`` **now acts as a facade over the
  V2 model path**.  Legacy constructor arguments are normalized into a
  ``BaseAttentiveSpec``, point vs quantile output is handled by structured
  head selection, and architecture choices are routed through the resolver
  system.

- |Feature| **Forecast-output contract standardized**:

  - point output follows ``BHO``
  - quantile output follows ``BHQO``

  This aligns the quantile axis ordering with the package convention
  established in v2.1.0.

Resolver and Registry Architecture
------------------------------------

- |Feature| **Backend-aware assembly added** around
  ``base_attentive.registry`` and ``base_attentive.resolver``, providing:

  - component registries and model registries,
  - backend-sensitive assembly flow,
  - resolver contracts for projections, encoders, pooling, fusion, and
    heads.

- |Internal| **Backend registration and registry aliasing hardened**.
  Resolver registrations now tolerate repeated setup, and legacy key
  aliases such as ``head.quantile`` are handled consistently.

- |Internal| **Resolver-built V2 components are more serialization-safe**.
  Generic resolver pieces that were plain callables are now tracked as
  serializable Keras layers where appropriate.

Runtime and Import Architecture
--------------------------------

- |Feature| **Public runtime shim added** as ``base_attentive.keras_runtime``
  to separate public runtime access from internal bootstrap logic.

- |Internal| **Root package imports lightened**.

  - ``base_attentive.__init__``, ``keras_runtime.py``,
    ``_keras_runtime.py``, and ``backend.__init__`` were revised.
  - ``import base_attentive`` no longer behaves like full runtime
    initialization.
  - Backend initialization is deferred until the backend is actually
    needed.

- |Internal| **Explicit backend configuration policy** replaces the silent
  TensorFlow fallback.  Behavior now follows three main cases:

  1. If the backend is not configured, BaseAttentive raises a
     configuration error instructing the user to set
     ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND``.
  2. If the backend is configured but not installed, BaseAttentive
     provides backend-specific installation guidance.
  3. If ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND=auto`` and
     ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_AUTO_INSTALL=1`` are set, runtime installation may
     be deferred until the backend is needed.

Bug Fixes
---------

- |Bugfix| **TensorFlow builder kwargs leakage fixed** — resolver metadata
  such as ``component_key`` no longer leaks into Keras layer constructors.

- |Bugfix| **TensorFlow registration idempotence improved** — repeated
  resolver setup no longer fails with duplicate component-registration
  errors, and alias consistency for quantile heads (``head.quantile``) was
  restored.

- |Bugfix| **JAX output path and round-trip issues resolved** in the V2
  quantile and multi-horizon heads.

- |Bugfix| **Torch encoder compatibility gaps fixed**, including missing
  ``forward()`` shim behavior in the Keras-backed implementation path.

- |Bugfix| **Legacy adapter hardened** with better ``mode`` normalization
  and clearer handling of contradictions (e.g. ``mode='point'`` with
  explicit quantiles).

- |Bugfix| **MPS fallback loss handling corrected** for Apple Silicon
  environments.

Internal Cleanup
----------------

- |Internal| **Backend-neutral rewrites** in component configuration
  helpers, attention and temporal helper modules, loss and masking helpers,
  and legacy core imports to remove TensorFlow-shaped assumptions.

- |Internal| **Runtime-dead and mislocated helper modules removed or
  relocated**.  Developer-only matrix tools were moved out of the
  installable runtime package.

Testing
-------

- |Feature| **Greatly expanded test coverage** across multi-backend
  runtime behavior, import lightening, V2 constructor parity,
  configuration and JSON round-trip serialization, backend registration
  coverage, and ``BaseAttentive`` training API behavior.  Full CI matrix
  (Windows + Linux, Python 3.10–3.12) passes cleanly.

- |Feature| **Training-path tests added** that verify ``BaseAttentive``
  behaves as a real Keras model under correct runtime loading, covering
  ``compile()``, ``fit()``, ``predict()``, and save/reload.

.. _Migration Notes:

Migration Notes
---------------

- |Feature| **Backend selection is now explicit**.  Set one of:

  - ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND=tensorflow``
  - ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND=torch``
  - ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND=jax``
  - ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_BACKEND=auto``

  Do not rely on silent TensorFlow fallback.  If automatic installation is
  desired when the backend is missing, also set
  ``BASE_ATTENTIVE_AUTO_INSTALL=1``.

- |Deprecated| **Point vs quantile intent is now structural, not a
  runtime mode**.  Legacy users should note that ``mode='point'`` and
  ``mode='quantile'`` are no longer meaningful runtime concepts.  Providing
  no quantiles selects a point head; providing quantiles selects a quantile
  head.  The legacy adapter still translates older usage, but new code
  should follow the structured head semantics.

- |Internal| **Keras runtime binding**: to use ``BaseAttentive`` as a real
  Keras model with training APIs, ensure the chosen Keras backend/runtime
  is available before importing model-defining modules in user code or
  notebooks.
